---
title: 3900 Mini Mill SOP
layout: doc
author: 
date: 
---

# Manual


## Safety

Always wear safety glasses when performing ANY operation on the machine
tools. Make sure that long hair is tied up and that any dangling
clothing/jewelery is removed. Closed toes shoes are required at all
times in the machine tool area. Never use machine tools if you are alone
in the lab.

## Machine Set-up

## Machine component description

## Fixturing
![](img/image3.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

Make sure that your stock is securely fastened in the vise such that you
can complete the intended operation without moving the part and without
crashing the tooling into the vise.

## Tooling
![](img/image12.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

### A note about tooling

Tooling in the US is almost exclusively in imperial units. This is
because it is still cheaper to continue manufacturing tooling in
imperial units than to switch to metric.

### End Mills
End mills are the work horse of manual
milling. They come in a variety of sizes and shapes.  
![](img/image6.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}  

### Drill Bits
Drill bits are just like every other drill bit ever. 
Please keep machine tool drills separate from other drill bits in the lab.  
![](img/image11.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}  
Edge finder This tool is used to set the origin of your working surface.

## Machining speeds

Choosing an appropriate machining speed is critical for the safe and
effective operation of machine tools. There are two criteria that need
to be determined before operating the machine they are; spindle speed
and feed rate.

Spindle speed: refers to the rotational speed of the tool and is set by
use of the dial located near the bottom of the mill control panel.

Feed rate: is the linear speed with which you are going to move the tool
across the material. For manual machines this is more ambiguous as it is
determined by the speed with which the operator turns the controls of
the machine while performing machining operations.

[Here](https://littlemachineshop.com/reference/cuttingspeeds.php) is a
chart of feed rates and cutting speeds put out by the manufacturer of
this machine. feel free to use their built in calculators to figure out
the appropriate settings for the machine.

## Machine Operation

Once your material is securely fastened in the attached vise, install
the desired tool by removing the black plastic cap from the top of the
machine to reveal the locking screw. select the appropriate sized collet
to hold your tool and insert the tool into your selected collet, tool
should fit snugly into the collet without being hard to slide in or out.
Place the tool and collet into the tool holder, making sure to align the
keyway on the collet with the key inside the tool holder, and tighten
the locking screw with your fingers to make sure that it is not cross
threaded. \*\* WARNING:\*\* Tools may be extremely sharp. When inserting
the tool into to tool holder grip the tool by the base of the collet to
avoid cutting your hand.

![](img/image13.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

Power on the machine by pressing the green power button located on the
left side of the control panel, pictured below. The green power light on
the front of the control panel should come on.

![](img/image14.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

Select the spindle speed from the above chart and set the correct speed
using the knob on the control panel. Caution: it is not advisable to
exceed 1500 RPM on this machine.

### Machining controls

Manual machines are controlled by turning dials which control the X, Y
and Z axis movement of the tool. The location and details of these dials
are described in detail below.

![](img/label.png){width="6.5in" height="4.82in"}

The Z-axis can be controled at both fine and coarse incriments. Switch
to the fine control by pushing the coarse control handle (pictured
above) until the drive teeth have completely engaged. The fine control
will now turn smoothly.

Caution: Never move a tool that is not spinning across the work piece.
do not stop a tool that is in contact with the work piece unless it is
an emergency.

### Using an edge finder

Edge finders are a device used to visually find the edge of a piece of
material. This allows you to accurately place machined features in the
correct locations on the part. Below is a video detailing the use of an
edge finder.

[Here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5_qiPE5z7SE) is a video
describing the proper use of an edge finder for locating the position of
your material in the vise.

### Milling

With an appropriate end mill installed in the machine. Move the quill to
the desired position at the surface of the part move an additional
distance below the surface of the part corresponding to the desired
depth of cut and move across the material in the desired direction.
Reminder: Take cuts in multiple passes whenever possible. This takes
developing a little intuition, just remember that a shallower cut at a
slower feed rate will almost always result in a better surface finish
and a more dimensionally accurate part.

### Drilling

The manual mill may be used much like a precision drill press. After
setting the desired location of the hole usinf the X and Y controls use
the doarse Z-axis control to move the quill down into the work piece.
Remember to use a proper "pecking" technique to increase tool life and
achieve a more dimensionally acurate hole.

[Here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fdRCeTeAOpA) is a video showing
proper drilling technique.

### Clean up

Please clean up after yourself! We are not your mother.
